The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dalrymple's Equation, by Paul W.
Fairman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Dalrymple's Equation

Author: Paul W. Fairman

Release Date: November 17, 2021 [eBook #66756]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DALRYMPLE'S EQUATION ***





               You meet a lot of screwy people when you
             do police work. Like the guy who popped up in
            a murder job. Offered to solve the case with--

                         Dalrymple's Equation

                          By Paul W. Fairman

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                               June 1956
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


It's the not knowing that gets you. The wondering. Thinking sometimes
one way and sometimes the other. But never knowing for sure. Being
suckered is bad enough but _wondering_ whether you've been suckered is
rougher. Or whether you've let the biggest thing since fingerprints
slide right by you.

Someday the case may be solved. Then we'll know for sure--one way or
the other--Donovan and I. What case? Wait 'til I tell you. It won't
take long.

The thing started with as crazy a murder as two Homicide cops ever
got called in on. In a bar on Tenth Avenue near Grand--you probably
know the place and you probably read about the case. It was in all the
papers. But the whole story never saw print.

We were rung into it by a call from the squad car boys who got there
first. We walked in and a cop I didn't know pointed a thumb at a young
guy lying with his head on the bar and said, "Deader than a lamp post
for my money."

A young lad--around twenty-three or four--lying there as though he'd
had one too many and was sleeping it off. He _had_ downed one too many.
And he would spend all eternity sleeping it off.

He was all through.

The barkeep stood there with his apron hanging out and a baffled look
on his face. A look that had all the earmarks of being genuine. I said,
"Kennedy--Homicide. What happened?"

The barkeep shrugged and licked his dry lips. "I dunno. He just keeled
over. I got scared and called the cops."

The kid certainly looked like a morgue job, as I said, but we
don't take things like that for granted. The squad car boys had
called General Hospital and now a couple of internes came in with a
respirator. They didn't use it, though. One of them put his nose close
down to the kid's mouth and then looked at the barkeep. "You served him
a drink?"

The barkeep nodded. "That's what he came in for."

"Let's see the bottle."

The barkeep gave that a little thought and then took a bottle off the
rack and pushed it over the bar. The interne sniffed it, made a face
and said, "There's enough arsenic in there to depopulate New Jersey."

"Arsenic!" the barkeep croaked. "You're crazy! We don't serve nobody no
arsenic here!"

The interne looked at Donovan and me and said, "Call your meat wagon,
lads. This one is beyond us."

He had identification--an Arthur Davis, with nothing at all sinister
in his wallet. The lab men came and there was a lot of activity for
an hour or so and then we padlocked the joint and took the barkeep
downtown with us. His on-the-spot story was simple. Davis had come in
and ordered a drink. The barkeep served it up. Davis knocked it off.
The drink, in turn, knocked Davis off.

The barkeep's name was Timothy Garver. He was a middle-aged cork puller
who had been in the business most of his life. We ran him through R and
I and found him clean. Then we sat him down in the interrogation room
and started digging into him.

"What did you have against Davis?"

Garver looked like a flabby-jowled ghost. His hands shook. "Nothing. So
help me. I never seen the guy before."

"You think we'll swallow that?" Donovan asked. "You think you're
playing with school kids? Telling us you poison a guy you never saw
before?"

I said, "Maybe he did it for laughs."

"I didn't poison him!" Garver pleaded. "You got to believe me!"

"You mean there wasn't any poison in that bottle?"

"Sure there was--if you say so. What I mean is I didn't put it there. I
didn't know it was there. I--"

"What you mean is you'd planned to get the guy out into the alley after
he was dead and you lost your nerve after he keeled over."

"No--no! Nothing like that."

"You had that bottle spiked, waiting for Davis to come in."

"No--no! It was just an ordinary bar bottle."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Every tavern has a brand of whisky they push--their bar whisky. When a
customer isn't particular about his brand we give him the bar liquor."

It seemed to me the guy was gaining courage. He wasn't quite as nervous
as he'd been. "You served other people out of that same bottle?" I
asked.

He licked his lips and dropped his eyes before he answered. "Sure I
did."

"But that was before you put the arsenic in it."

"I didn't put any poison in that bottle. And you guys can't pin this on
me!"

"What makes you think we can't?"

"Because I never knew the fellow and you can't prove I did. So how are
you going to make anybody believe I killed somebody I didn't know and
had nothing against. You think I'm nuts or something?"

"It's a possibility," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Donovan narrowed his eyes at Garver and said, "You're holding
something back. Come on! Out with it."

Again that guilty look as Garver shook his head. But you can't send a
guilty look to the chair and it seemed Garver had us stymied. At least
for a while. We jugged him on suspicion but we knew unless we got
something else to strengthen the case we wouldn't get an indictment
against him. There just wasn't enough.

Donovan and I chewed it over with the Captain and he couldn't give us
any help except the advice to keep plugging. We told him we'd try to
come up with something and went on back to the tavern.

The owner had been there and gone and we still had a patrolman
stationed in front. Donovan unlocked the door and released the
patrolman for his regular beat and we went inside.

It was very quiet. Naturally. Nothing is quieter in this world than an
empty bar. I said, "Well, where do we start?"

Donovan shrugged. "You got me. And you know damn well nothing's going
to happen on this case until it breaks from the outside."

"That's right." What he meant was a new angle coming from a stoolie.
Or something opening up while we investigated Davis' background or
Garver's.

But something new was added right there in the tavern. Very suddenly. A
guy popped up from behind the bar and said, "Hello."

We whirled around and looked at him and Donovan snorted, "Who the hell
are you?"

"My name is Tennyson Dalrymple."

"What kind of a label is that?"

The man came around from behind the bar. "I liked it--I took it. If it
annoys you I'm sorry." But you could tell by the sneer on his face that
he wasn't sorry at all.

He was a medium-sized unattractive figure of a man and yet you couldn't
put your finger on just where the unattractiveness came from. He wasn't
good looking but neither was he repulsive. He didn't have a superman's
frame but neither was he a cripple nor a malformed freak. There was
just something about him you took an instant dislike to and the dislike
stayed with you.

And Dalrymple seemed to enjoy increasing the antagonism. He wore a
habitual sneer and his voice had a cutting quality to it.

I said, "What the hell are you doing in here?"

"Going about my business."

"Entrance is prohibited. There was a policeman in front. The door was
locked."

"There's a back door."

"That was locked too."

"Locks are silly things. Any fool should be able to handle such feeble
devices."

Donovan was snarling. "Look, brother. You're talking yourself right
into trouble. Now tell us what you're doing here and tell it quick."

"Reading the gas meter."

"Why?"

"Why would anyone read a gas meter? I work for the gas company. This
place is on my route."

"I think you're lying."

"It will be easy enough to find out."

"We'll find out at headquarters."

"You're taking me in?"

"What do you think?"

Dalrymple certainly wasn't afraid of cops. He shook his head in disgust
and said, "This is certainly a stupid world you live in. A world of
idiots. Really it is."

Normally I'm pretty easy going but this punk with his talent for
rubbing people the wrong way, just plain got me. "If you're so damn
smart why are you reading meters for the gas company?"

He grinned, and his grin said he was happy at getting a rise out of me.
"I just arrived recently. The job will do until I get around to what
I'm planning."

       *       *       *       *       *

Donovan vented his hostility by hauling the guy out to the car.
Dalrymple made no resistance but Donovan managed to get mildly rough
regardless. This also seemed to make the little intruder happy. As
though he took the roughness as a sign he'd got under Donovan's skin
too. Which he had.

He threw a few insults at us while we rode to headquarters but we held
in, knowing if we gave ourselves an inch we'd take a mile and slug him
and have it over with.

In the interrogation room we went at him with all the fixings. A strong
light in his eyes--cigarette smoke in his face.

Donovan, with a snarl on his puss said, "All right, buster. Let's cut
out the jokes. What were you doing in that tavern?"

"Reading the gas meter."

"I said cut out the jokes."

"You've got my identification. What makes you think I had any other
reason for going there?"

"I'll ask the questions. Maybe you don't realize what a spot you're in."

"This is idiotic. This whole procedure emanates from your personal
dislike of me. All you have to do is call the company."

"What do you know about the Davis killing?"

"Only what I heard in the neighborhood. Intriguing little equation,
isn't it?"

I think we'd realized from the beginning that we had nothing on
Dalrymple and that we wouldn't be able to involve him. He'd hit it on
the nose when he said our motivation was personal dislike. Finally I
went out and called the gas company, realizing we'd delayed doing this
because we knew it would lose Dalrymple for us.

When I went back and told Donovan, he still hated to let go. "You
know," he told the sneering little meter-reader, "we can still throw
you in the can."

"What for?"

"Trespassing, Breaking and entering."

"Oh, yes. But you won't."

"And why not?"

"Because it would be too small a triumph and you know you would be
acting from spite. It would diminish your stature in your own eyes."

Donovan was trying to swallow his helpless wrath when I remembered
something Dalrymple had said. "Listen, punk. Exactly where did you come
from?"

"That's right. You made some funny cracks. You said, to quote, 'This
is certainly a stupid world you live in. A world of idiots.' You also
said, 'I've just arrived recently.' Now it occurs to me--"

"That I might have come from a place beyond this planet you call Earth?"

"No. That you're a crackpot--a psycho--and maybe we'd _better_ hold
you."

He sneered at me and ticked off his replies on his fingers. "I did come
from a world far away from yours. I'm not a crackpot--not a psycho. And
you will not hold me."

I looked at Donovan. Donovan looked at me. His voice gentled into a
tone of soft contempt.

"Just where _do_ you come from, punk?"

"From Arva Majoris and don't bother looking it up. It's a planet in a
galaxy beyond the conception of your most brilliant minds. And I use
the term _brilliant_ very loosely."

"And how did you get here?"

"You couldn't possibly understand if I told you. Your elemental mind
simply couldn't grasp the mathematical accident that brought me here;
nor the ten-million-to-one chance of it ever happening again."

Donovan grinned in anticipation. "And you actually think we aren't
going to turn you over to Psycho?"

"Of course you're not."

"And for what reason will we refrain from such?"

"Because if you do that, you'll never get your stupid little murder
solved."

I found myself poised and ready to pounce. "Then you _have_ been
holding out."

"If you mean do I know who killed Davis--no. If you mean can I find
out--yes."

"Well, well," Donovan growled. "He's a detective too."

Dalrymple split a sneer between us. "It's nothing but a mathematical
problem. In the world I come from, students corresponding to your
first-graders are started out on far harder equations."

"So you can just take a pencil and figure it out, eh?"

"Certainly."

       *       *       *       *       *

I've tried to remember since, exactly what my reaction to Dalrymple
was at that time. Hatred transcended any other emotion I may have had.
But there was something else. A feeling of almost personal discomfort
springing from the certainty that he wanted us to hate him, or at least
didn't care whether or not we did. This was a part of my reaction. And
wondering why, also.

There was an element of vague fear, too, and of this I'm sure--a vague
senseless conviction this crackpot could do all he claimed he could.

I remember that when this last came to my conscious mind, I rejected it
with indignation. And I knew Donovan was rejecting something too. He
turned from Dalrymple with a sneer and said, "We haven't got time to
fool with psychos. We've got a murder to solve. Kick this guy out and
let the white coats find him all over again."

I was sneering too. I took out a pencil and threw it at him and said,
"All right, wise guy. There's one. Let's see what you can do."

"Have you got a piece of paper?"

Almost savagely, Donovan ripped a page off the calendar. It was blank
on the back. He threw it on the table and all the time I could see his
eyes. They were asking, _Why in the hell am I doing this?_ and trying
to cover the question by showing contempt.

We glanced swiftly at each other and there was guilt in both our
faces; like two realists meeting outside a fortune teller's tent. Then
Dalrymple took over.

"We have certain facts," he began. "A dead man; the person who admits
he went through the physical motions of killing him. We also have the
method of producing death--poison--and the setting of the crime."

"I think we've had enough of this clowning," Donovan said in a husky
voice.

Dalrymple ignored the interruption, not even bothering to sneer at
Donovan. "As every school child on my planet knows, each of these
facts must be given a symbol and must become a part of our exploratory
equation."

I was a little rusty on such things but it sounded to me about the
same way school children on our planet went about solving problems in
algebra. I didn't say anything though.

Dalrymple had the pencil racing over the paper, laying out a series of
weird symbols the like of which I had never seen. They were neither
numbers nor letters; nor the kind of geometric or algebra symbols used
on earth either. Of that I was sure.

The closest I can come is to compare them to Egyptian hieroglyphics and
yet that's far from the mark. But whatever they were, Dalrymple seemed
to know exactly what he was doing.

After a few minutes, he leaned back and said, "There--the exploratory
equation is complete. Now we search it for flaws."

Donovan and I had got interested to the point that hostilities were
temporarily suspended. Donovan asked, "Search what for which flaws."

"You haven't the mental scope to understand even the basics of what
I'm doing, but maybe you can understand this: There is no such thing
as chance in a civilization or a culture which is properly based upon
mathematics. In such a civilization lies and evasions are unheard of
because all action and motivation past, present, or future, can be
evaluated and revealed in complete exactitude."

       *       *       *       *       *

We were trying to follow along. I said, "We've got things like that.
Robot brains, we call them. They figure out impossible problems."

And it came to me at that moment how we were taking for granted,
through our conversation, our statements, and even our thinking, that
this Dalrymple was exactly what he'd said he was--a man from another
world.

He said, "I know what you refer to, but they are so childishly
conceived as to be almost useless." The old sneer again.

Donovan growled. "You talk a lot but you haven't proved a damn thing."

"On the contrary. The flaws in this equation stand out by themselves.
For instance, our _zong_ is implicated but must obviously be
supplemented in order to balance the _terz_ shading of the exploratory
equation."

"Are you kidding?" Donovan rasped.

"I'll forego technical terms and translate into realities you can
grasp. It amounts to this: The bartender poured the actual poison into
the glass, but all unknowing. However, as a dominant factor of the
equation he must be further developed along the lines of secondary
motivation. In other words, a completely unrelated motivation on his
part cleared the way for the crime."

Dalrymple's fingers were flying. More of the weird symbols were
appearing. "The motivation for the weight he bears in the case is made
up of two characteristics--habit and greed."

"And where does that get us?" I asked.

"It reveals the fact that the bartender poured the poison into the
bottle. But without knowledge that it was poison nor with malicious
intent."

"That's impossible!" I said.

"Not at all. The whole sequence becomes clear when we strive to
complete our equational balance in the first phase. The bartender
poured an unconsumed drink back into the bottle after whoever ordered
it walked out without drinking it."

Of course! The logic of it hit Donovan and me at the same moment.
Donovan said, "How in the hell did you ever think of that?"

He meant it as a compliment but Dalrymple did not take it as such. "I
didn't think of it, you fool. I worked it out. Haven't you understood
anything I've told you? It's all here in the progression of the
equation. Incidentally, that factor is the pivot of the whole sequence.
Your stupid logic should carry you on from there."

"Somebody was trying to poison somebody else!" Donovan said.

"There had to be two men," I added. "They came in and ordered drinks.
One poured poison in the other's drink. Then they left without--"

Dalrymple was leering at me. "How about one man and--suicide?"

I swore at myself inwardly for giving him the opening. But he turned
back to his symbols and said, "By sheer blundering chance you hit it,
though. It was two men and attempted murder."

Donovan wasn't having much to say. Dalrymple threw down the pencil.
"I'll be going now. I have more important things to do."

"Can you give us the names of the two men?" I asked, and again swore at
myself for being over-eager.

Dalrymple gave me a long, disgusted clinical look. "I can, but I won't.
It would take another hour to round out the equation and I don't feel
like doing all your work for you. If you can't take what I've given you
and tie up the case, then you'd better both resign."

He got up and started to leave. At the door, he turned. "I live at the
Crestwood Hotel if you want to get in touch with me again." He sneered.
"Maybe you'll need help some day in tying your shoes."

He left. Neither Donovan nor I made any attempt to stop him. After a
long minute Donovan said, "We can't let him go. He's involved in that
killing. He's got to be. How else would he know?"

"Are you sure he's involved?"

Donovan didn't answer. He picked up the pencil and snapped it in two
with a savage gesture. "The sneering little son-of-a--"

"Besides, we've got no proof he was right in anything he said."

"Let's go find out."

We found out. It didn't take long and we got a citation. We hit Garver
with one question--"Who was in the bar just before Davis entered?" and
he collapsed right in our laps. We got all he knew and it wasn't hard
to trace down two guys named Kinder and Walpole.

They were both drunk when they came in and Walpole had some arsenic
with him that he was going to make a bug spray with. He got sore at
Kinder for some drunken reason and poured some of the stuff into his
drink while Kinder was in the washroom. Then something pulled them back
into the street before they had their drinks. Garver heard metal grind
and thought that was probably it. Once outside, they probably forgot
what tavern they'd been in because they didn't return.

Garver was glad to get rid of them. He hadn't seen the poison-pouring
bit and dumped the shots into the bottle. When Davis keeled over as a
result of the next shot out of the bottle, Garver was scared. He could
lose his job and his boss could have lost his license for serving
drunks and for pouring the whisky back.

So that was the case. A tragic incident, with Walpole not even
remembering what he'd done. And with Davis dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

We would have been better off leaving it there--charging Dalrymple
off as a crackpot who had made a lucky guess and taking the credit
for breaking the case. We _did_ take the credit, but it was hard to
believe, once he'd gone, that Dalrymple was actually for real. So one
afternoon a couple of weeks later we were passing the Crestwood Hotel.
Donovan braked the car and squinted at the building.

"This is where he said he lived."

I knew who Donovan meant. "Uh-huh."

"Let's go up."

"Why not?"

We went in and got the room number from the clerk and went on up. We
knocked. Dalrymple opened the door. He hadn't changed a bit. There was
a sneer on his face, hostility in his voice when he said, "Ha--the
police force. What happened? Somebody steal your squad car?".

He turned around before we could answer and went back into the room. We
followed him and stood there looking at the layout. He had a big table
in the middle of the floor and there was a huge sheet of paper on it.
The sheet was almost completely covered with the funny symbols he'd
used in solving the bar poisoning. Or had he solved it?

Anyhow, he went back to his work as though we hadn't even come--adding
more symbols along one edge--and finally Donovan asked, "What in the
hell are you doing?"

Dalrymple looked up as though annoyed at being disturbed. "I'm
arranging to stay on your planet. I like it here."

"But what's all that got to do with staying?"

"I have to have money. The way things are done here, money is vitally
necessary."

"How are you going to get it?"

Dalrymple looked up and his sneer brightened. "I'm going to steal it."

Donovan and I looked at each other in a kind of double-take. Then I
said, "I don't suppose you'd care to tell us how and where you're going
to do the stealing?"

"I won't tell you how--that would be silly. I don't mind telling you
where." He put down another symbol.

"All right--where?"

"I'm not quite sure yet. Chicago, or New York, or Pittsburgh, or....
This is the master plan. I've almost finished. It involves the
principals--the method of operation. There is much more to be done of
course. Assistants will have to be approached, analyzed mathematically
as to capabilities--"

"How much money are you thinking of stealing?"

"I figure I'll need about five million," Dalrymple said calmly.

Donovan and I looked at each other again and our eyes asked the
questions. What should we do about this? Haul the guy in and get
laughed at? Or did we have a right to haul him in if we wanted to? Just
call him a crackpot and let it go at that?

Sure. It was the obvious thing to do. And the easiest. Why stick our
necks out. And at that moment I saw Dalrymple smile ever so slightly
as though he knew exactly what was going on in our minds--had made
allowances for it on his damned chart.

Donovan shrugged. "Let's get away from this creep," he said.

We turned and walked out.

       *       *       *       *       *

And we never saw Dalrymple again. In fact I'd practically forgotten
about him, when a year later--the date was January 17, 1951--I came
back to the squad-room late in the afternoon and there was a paper
lying on the desk Donovan and I used. Its headline read:

                STICKUP MEN GET SEVEN MILLION IN BOSTON

And the story went on to tell of the now famous Brinks holdup in
that city; a holdup that had not been solved to this day; a seemingly
perfect crime.

Still nothing for me to get excited about. Not until I saw the letter
that had been lying under the paper. It was addressed to both Donovan
and me--the names and destination printed in lead pencil. There was no
return address. I tore it open. A white card fell out. On the card was
printed two words--nothing else. The words read:

--OR BOSTON.

       *       *       *       *       *

So that's where we sit now. Almost seven years ago that stickup
occurred. For seven years Donovan and I had waited for the law to
crack it so we could quit wondering; so we could tell ourselves that
Dalrymple was just another screwball.

But the statute of limitations nearly ran out on the great Brinks
robbery and now we're beginning to wonder if it really was solved.
Wondering if we could have stopped it by stopping Dalrymple, the brain
behind it all.

Wondering if he really was a man from another--oh hell! It just
couldn't be!

Or could it?

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DALRYMPLE'S EQUATION ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
